README.md, before:

Logisim-Evolution (Holy Cross Edition)
======================================

You can get the latest *stable version* of Logisim-Evolution (Holy Cross Edition) here:

[![Download for Windows](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-windows.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2hc.exe)
[![Download for Mac](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-mac.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2-HC.pkg)
[![Download for Linux](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-linux.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/logisim-evolution-5.0.2hc.jar)

**MAC Security Warning**: On some recent MacOS versions, the OS security
gatekeeper may prevent you from opening the PKG file above directly. Instead,
right-click and "Save As..." to save the PKG file to your download folder. Then
go to your download folder in the finder, right click the PKG file and "Open
with... Installer (Default)". When given a security warning, click "Open". This
should install the program.

An alternative [ZIP format version for Windows](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2hc-windows.zip) is
also available. After downloading it, extract the compressed contents to a directory of your choice and run the
extracted exe file.

Windows and Mac versions will work only on Windows or Mac. The platform-independent JAR file should work on any
platform, but requires that Java version 11 or above be installed separately
(Java version 17 is recommended; the Adoptium project's Temurin OpenJDK 17
available [here](https://adoptium.net/) is one possible choice).
To run the JAR file, open a command line (or Mac Terminal or Windows CMD.exe
prompt) and type `java -jar logisim-evolution-5.0.2hc.jar` from within the
directory where you have downloaded the JAR file.

## What's new in version 5.x.x

* Mac releases are compiled for Apple M1 and M2 processors, so should perform
  much better.
* A new built-in audio component library.
* Custom appearance shapes can be automatically hidden or shown depending on
  circuit state. This enables building fancy dynamic components that change
  appearance depending on their state.
* Higher auto-tick rates.
* Scroll/zoom now works on mac, and many other bug fixes and small
  user-interface improvements.
* Auto-backup and recovery of projects to help avoid losing your work.

## History

This is a fork of
[reds-heig logisim-evolution](https://github.com/reds-heig/logisim-evolution), which in
turn is a fork of the original
[Logisim by Dr. Carl Burch](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/). Mainly, the changes
revolve around:
* better support for the Altera DE0 FPGA prototype board;
* bidirectional FPGA I/O ports (e.g. to support the DE0 keyboard and LCD module).
* new HDL components (multipliers, divmod, etc.);
* support for VHDL _generics_;
* UI changes to aid in HDL editing and FPGA downloading.
* Performance has been improved in this version with help from the [YourKit java profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).
  ![YourKit Logo](https://mathcs.holycross.edu/~kwalsh/yklogo.png)

On a historical note: I am also the author of all the scattered code mentioning
"Cornell's version of Logisim", both in the reds-heig fork and Carl Burch's
version. That code was written when I taught cs3410 (previously cs314) as a grad
student and, before that, as an undergrad at Cornell. Unsurprisingly, this new
fork is to support the course I now teach, csci226, at
[Holy Cross](https://mathcs.holycross.edu/~csci226/).

This version, Logisim-evolution (Holy Cross Edition) is maintained by:
* Kevin Walsh (kwalsh@holycross.edu), [College of the Holy Cross](https://holycross.edu) 


Below is the README.md file from the upstream reds-heig fork.

logisim-evolution
=================

Logisim is an educational tool for designing and simulating digital logic circuits.
It has been originally created by [Dr. Carl Burch](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/) and actively developed until 2011.
After this date the author focused on other projects, and recently the development has been officially stopped  [(see his message here)](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/retire-note.html).

In the meantime, people from a group of swiss institutes ([Haute École Spécialisée Bernoise](http://www.bfh.ch), [Haute École du paysage, d'ingénierie et d'architecture de Genève](http://hepia.hesge.ch), and [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch)) started developing a version of Logisim that fitted their courses, integrating several tools -- for instance a chronogram, the possibility to test the schematics directly on an electronic board, TCL/TK consoles, ...

The project is currently maintained by the [REDS Institute](http://reds.heig-vd.ch), which is part of the [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch), Yverdon-les-Bains, Switzerland.

We have decided to release this new Logisim version under the name logisim-evolution, to highlight the large number of changes that occurred in these years, and **we actively seek the contribution of the community**.

## What's new in logisim-evolution
* chronogram -- to see the evolution of signals in your circuit
* electronic board integration -- schematics can now be simulated on real hardware!
* board editor -- to add new electronic boards
* VHDL component -- a new component type whose behavior is specified in VHDL
* TCL/TK console -- interfaces between the circuit and the user
* DIP switches
* RGB LEDs
* large number of bug-fixes
* GUI improvements
* automatic updates
* code refactoring
* ...

## How to install logisim-evolution
You can find an already compiled **stable** version of the code [here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/logisim-evolution.jar).
To execute it, click on the downloaded file or type in a console
```bash
java -jar logisim-evolution.jar
```

You can also compile it by yourself by cloning the repository on your local machine. Once this is done, enter the directory and execute
```bash
ant run
```
This also creates locally a .jar file, that you can distribute and use on other machines.

## Documentation
[Here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/IntroToLogisimEnglish.pdf)  you can find a tutorial (French version [here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/tutoLogisim.pdf)) that explains some basic usage of Logisim. The electronic card referenced in the tutorial is a small card we use in our laboratories -- you won't be able to buy it in a store -- but the descriptions should be good enough to be used for another generic board.

Another good reference is [this book](http://www.lulu.com/shop/george-self/exploring-digital-logic-with-logisim-ebook/ebook/product-21118223.html), where basic electronics is explained with the help of Logisim.

## Editing logisim-evolution in Eclipse
To import directly logisim-evolution in Eclipse, you can use Eclipse's import wizard:

*Import -> git project -> [put the connection details] -> New project -> Java project from Ant*

You will, however, encounter a problem when you will try to execute the code. In particular, an exception *ExceptionInInitializerError* will be thrown. To solve this, execute the *eclipse_fix.sh* script in the program's directory, or go in the *bin/* subdirectory and create links to the following directories available in the program's directory
* *boards_model*
* *javax*
* *libs*
* *resources*
* *doc*

## Retro-compatibility
We cannot assure retro-compatibility of logisim-evolution with files created with the original Logisim.
We have incorporated a parser that alters the name of the components to satisfy VHDL requirements for variable names,
but components evolved in shape since then (think, for instance, to RAM and counters).
You might need to rework a bit your circuits when opening them with logisim-evolution -- but the changes will be stored
in the new format, therefore you have to do your work only once.

## Wish-list
Logisim-evolution is a continuously-growing software, and we have several ideas we would like to implement. In particular, we would like to have
* unit tests for the code
* extensive documentation
* test circuits
* ...
If you are willing to contribute with any of these, please feel free to contact us!

## How to get support for logisim-evolution
Unfortunately, we do not have enough resources to provide direct support for logisim-evolution.
We will, however, try to deal with the raised issues in a *best-effort* way.

If you find a bug or have an idea for an interesting feature, please do not hesitate to open a ticket!

## License
The code is licensed under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, version 3.

## Credits
The following institutions/people actively contributed to Logisim-evolution:
* Carl Burch - Hendrix College - USA
* [Haute École Spécialisée Bernoise](http://www.bfh.ch) - Switzerland
* [Haute École du paysage, d'ingénierie et d'architecture de Genève](http://hepia.hesge.ch) - Switzerland
* [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch) - Switzerland
* Theldo Cruz Franqueira - Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais - Brasil
* Moshe Berman - Brooklyn College

If you feel that your name should be in this list, please feel free to send us a [mail](mailto:roberto.rigamonti@heig-vd.ch)!

## Other Logisim forks available on the net
* Logisim by Joseph Lawrance et al. [(link)](https://github.com/lawrancej/logisim) - they have started from Burch's original code and integrated it in several open-source development frameworks, cleaning up the code. We have taken a few code cleanups and the redo functionality from their code.
* logisim-iitd [(link)](https://code.google.com/p/logisim-iitd) - IIT Delhi version of Logisim, it integrates the Floating-Point Components within the Arithmetic Unit.
* Logisim for the CS3410 course, Cornell's University [(link)](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3410/2015sp/) - they have a very interesting test vector feature, that has only recently integrated in logisim-evolution.

Commit message:

add link to old version

README.md, after:

Logisim-Evolution (Holy Cross Edition)
======================================

You can get the latest *stable version* of Logisim-Evolution (Holy Cross Edition) here:

[![Download for Windows](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-windows.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2hc.exe)
[![Download for Mac](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-mac.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2-HC.pkg)
[![Download for Linux](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/holycross/images/download-linux.jpg)](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/logisim-evolution-5.0.2hc.jar)

**Older Mac Notice**: On older intel-based Macs, please use
[Mac OS Version 4.0.4-HC](https://mathcs.holycross.edu/~kwalsh/Logisim-Evolution-4.0.4-HC.pkg),
a slightly older version of the package. The newer 5.x version is not yet
compiled in a format usable by older Macs.

the 5.x version of Logisim will

**Mac Security Warning**: On some recent MacOS versions, the OS security
gatekeeper may prevent you from opening the PKG file above directly. Instead,
right-click and "Save As..." to save the PKG file to your download folder. Then
go to your download folder in the finder, right click the PKG file and "Open
with... Installer (Default)". When given a security warning, click "Open". This
should install the program.

An alternative [ZIP format version for Windows](https://github.com/kevinawalsh/logisim-evolution/releases/download/v5.0.2/Logisim-Evolution-5.0.2hc-windows.zip) is
also available. After downloading it, extract the compressed contents to a directory of your choice and run the
extracted exe file.

Windows and Mac versions will work only on Windows or Mac. The platform-independent JAR file should work on any
platform, but requires that Java version 11 or above be installed separately
(Java version 17 is recommended; the Adoptium project's Temurin OpenJDK 17
available [here](https://adoptium.net/) is one possible choice).
To run the JAR file, open a command line (or Mac Terminal or Windows CMD.exe
prompt) and type `java -jar logisim-evolution-5.0.2hc.jar` from within the
directory where you have downloaded the JAR file.

## What's new in version 5.x.x

* Mac releases are compiled for Apple M1 and M2 processors, so should perform
  much better.
* A new built-in audio component library.
* Custom appearance shapes can be automatically hidden or shown depending on
  circuit state. This enables building fancy dynamic components that change
  appearance depending on their state.
* Higher auto-tick rates.
* Scroll/zoom now works on mac, and many other bug fixes and small
  user-interface improvements.
* Auto-backup and recovery of projects to help avoid losing your work.

## History

This is a fork of
[reds-heig logisim-evolution](https://github.com/reds-heig/logisim-evolution), which in
turn is a fork of the original
[Logisim by Dr. Carl Burch](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/). Mainly, the changes
revolve around:
* better support for the Altera DE0 FPGA prototype board;
* bidirectional FPGA I/O ports (e.g. to support the DE0 keyboard and LCD module).
* new HDL components (multipliers, divmod, etc.);
* support for VHDL _generics_;
* UI changes to aid in HDL editing and FPGA downloading.
* Performance has been improved in this version with help from the [YourKit java profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/).
  ![YourKit Logo](https://mathcs.holycross.edu/~kwalsh/yklogo.png)

On a historical note: I am also the author of all the scattered code mentioning
"Cornell's version of Logisim", both in the reds-heig fork and Carl Burch's
version. That code was written when I taught cs3410 (previously cs314) as a grad
student and, before that, as an undergrad at Cornell. Unsurprisingly, this new
fork is to support the course I now teach, csci226, at
[Holy Cross](https://mathcs.holycross.edu/~csci226/).

This version, Logisim-evolution (Holy Cross Edition) is maintained by:
* Kevin Walsh (kwalsh@holycross.edu), [College of the Holy Cross](https://holycross.edu) 


Below is the README.md file from the upstream reds-heig fork.

logisim-evolution
=================

Logisim is an educational tool for designing and simulating digital logic circuits.
It has been originally created by [Dr. Carl Burch](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/) and actively developed until 2011.
After this date the author focused on other projects, and recently the development has been officially stopped  [(see his message here)](http://www.cburch.com/logisim/retire-note.html).

In the meantime, people from a group of swiss institutes ([Haute École Spécialisée Bernoise](http://www.bfh.ch), [Haute École du paysage, d'ingénierie et d'architecture de Genève](http://hepia.hesge.ch), and [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch)) started developing a version of Logisim that fitted their courses, integrating several tools -- for instance a chronogram, the possibility to test the schematics directly on an electronic board, TCL/TK consoles, ...

The project is currently maintained by the [REDS Institute](http://reds.heig-vd.ch), which is part of the [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch), Yverdon-les-Bains, Switzerland.

We have decided to release this new Logisim version under the name logisim-evolution, to highlight the large number of changes that occurred in these years, and **we actively seek the contribution of the community**.

## What's new in logisim-evolution
* chronogram -- to see the evolution of signals in your circuit
* electronic board integration -- schematics can now be simulated on real hardware!
* board editor -- to add new electronic boards
* VHDL component -- a new component type whose behavior is specified in VHDL
* TCL/TK console -- interfaces between the circuit and the user
* DIP switches
* RGB LEDs
* large number of bug-fixes
* GUI improvements
* automatic updates
* code refactoring
* ...

## How to install logisim-evolution
You can find an already compiled **stable** version of the code [here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/logisim-evolution.jar).
To execute it, click on the downloaded file or type in a console
```bash
java -jar logisim-evolution.jar
```

You can also compile it by yourself by cloning the repository on your local machine. Once this is done, enter the directory and execute
```bash
ant run
```
This also creates locally a .jar file, that you can distribute and use on other machines.

## Documentation
[Here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/IntroToLogisimEnglish.pdf)  you can find a tutorial (French version [here](http://reds-data.heig-vd.ch/logisim-evolution/tutoLogisim.pdf)) that explains some basic usage of Logisim. The electronic card referenced in the tutorial is a small card we use in our laboratories -- you won't be able to buy it in a store -- but the descriptions should be good enough to be used for another generic board.

Another good reference is [this book](http://www.lulu.com/shop/george-self/exploring-digital-logic-with-logisim-ebook/ebook/product-21118223.html), where basic electronics is explained with the help of Logisim.

## Editing logisim-evolution in Eclipse
To import directly logisim-evolution in Eclipse, you can use Eclipse's import wizard:

*Import -> git project -> [put the connection details] -> New project -> Java project from Ant*

You will, however, encounter a problem when you will try to execute the code. In particular, an exception *ExceptionInInitializerError* will be thrown. To solve this, execute the *eclipse_fix.sh* script in the program's directory, or go in the *bin/* subdirectory and create links to the following directories available in the program's directory
* *boards_model*
* *javax*
* *libs*
* *resources*
* *doc*

## Retro-compatibility
We cannot assure retro-compatibility of logisim-evolution with files created with the original Logisim.
We have incorporated a parser that alters the name of the components to satisfy VHDL requirements for variable names,
but components evolved in shape since then (think, for instance, to RAM and counters).
You might need to rework a bit your circuits when opening them with logisim-evolution -- but the changes will be stored
in the new format, therefore you have to do your work only once.

## Wish-list
Logisim-evolution is a continuously-growing software, and we have several ideas we would like to implement. In particular, we would like to have
* unit tests for the code
* extensive documentation
* test circuits
* ...
If you are willing to contribute with any of these, please feel free to contact us!

## How to get support for logisim-evolution
Unfortunately, we do not have enough resources to provide direct support for logisim-evolution.
We will, however, try to deal with the raised issues in a *best-effort* way.

If you find a bug or have an idea for an interesting feature, please do not hesitate to open a ticket!

## License
The code is licensed under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, version 3.

## Credits
The following institutions/people actively contributed to Logisim-evolution:
* Carl Burch - Hendrix College - USA
* [Haute École Spécialisée Bernoise](http://www.bfh.ch) - Switzerland
* [Haute École du paysage, d'ingénierie et d'architecture de Genève](http://hepia.hesge.ch) - Switzerland
* [Haute École d'Ingénierie et de Gestion du Canton de Vaud](http://www.heig-vd.ch) - Switzerland
* Theldo Cruz Franqueira - Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais - Brasil
* Moshe Berman - Brooklyn College

If you feel that your name should be in this list, please feel free to send us a [mail](mailto:roberto.rigamonti@heig-vd.ch)!

## Other Logisim forks available on the net
* Logisim by Joseph Lawrance et al. [(link)](https://github.com/lawrancej/logisim) - they have started from Burch's original code and integrated it in several open-source development frameworks, cleaning up the code. We have taken a few code cleanups and the redo functionality from their code.
* logisim-iitd [(link)](https://code.google.com/p/logisim-iitd) - IIT Delhi version of Logisim, it integrates the Floating-Point Components within the Arithmetic Unit.
* Logisim for the CS3410 course, Cornell's University [(link)](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3410/2015sp/) - they have a very interesting test vector feature, that has only recently integrated in logisim-evolution.
